Data science

Data science is the study of where information comes from, what it represents and how it can be turned into a valuable resource in the creation of business and IT strategies. Mining large amounts of structured and unstructured data to identify patterns can help an organization rein in costs, increase efficiencies, recognize new market opportunities and increase the organization's competitive advantage.

Data extraction is the act of retrieving specific data from unstructured or poorly structured data sources for further processing and investigation. Data scientists must possess a combination of analytic, machine learning, data mining and statistical skills, as well as experience with algorithms and coding. Along with managing and interpreting large amounts of data, many data scientists are also tasked with creating data visualization models that help illustrate the business value of digital information.

The main advantage of enlisting data science in an organization is the empowerment and facilitation of decision-making. Organizations with data scientists can factor in quantifiable, data-based evidence into their business decisions. These data-driven decisions can ultimately lead to increased profitability and improved operational efficiency, business performance and workflows. In customer-facing organizations, data science helps identify and refine target audiences.

The specific benefits of data science vary depending on the company's goal and the industry. Sales and marketing departments, for example, can mine customer data to improve conversion rates or create one-to-one marketing campaigns. Banking institutions are mining data to enhance fraud detection. Streaming services like Netflix mine data to determine what its users are interested in, and use that data to determine what TV shows or films to produce. Data-based algorithms are also used at Netflix to create personalized recommendations based on a user's viewing history. Shipment companies like DHL, FedEx and UPS use data science to find the best delivery routes and times, as well as the best modes of transport for their shipments.